feat: blog: Differences between linting and type checking (#664)
eslint/eslint.org: src/content/blog/2024-12-04-differences-between-linting-and-type-checking.md

---
layout: post
title: "Differences between linting and type checking"
teaser: "Linters such as ESLint and type checkers such as TypeScript catch different areas of code defects — and are best used in conjunction with each other."
authors:
  - joshuakgoldberg
categories:
  - Storytime
tags:
  - Linting
---

> Linters and type checkers are two kinds of tools that both analyze code and report on detected issues.

Reviewer: I think we need a bit more in the intro. This is a bit abstract, and I think could use some grounding in reality. Something like, "If you're a JavaScript developer today, you're probably using TypeScript or ESLint, or both..."

They may seem similar at first.
However, the two kinds of tools detect very different issues and are useful in different ways.

> ## Definitions

Reviewer: I think I'd like to make this more conversation that just listing definitions.

```suggestion
## What is static analysis?
```

> *"Static analysis"* is the term for tooling that checks code for issues without running it.

Reviewer: Stylistically, let's just use italics when introducing new terms (no quotes).

Also, static analysis isn't tooling, it's what the tooling does, so probably more accurately:

```suggestion
*Static analysis* is the inspection of source code without executing it. This differs from *dynamic analysis*, in which source code is inspected while it is executed. As such, dynamic analysis brings with it the inherent danger of executing malicious code or creating side effects while static analysis is safe to execute regardless of the source code.
```

> There are three forms of static analysis commonly used in web development projects today:

Reviewer: I'd add another paragraph here explaining the value of static analysis for catching problems before moving on to discuss linters and type checkers.

> 1. **Formatters**: only print your code quickly, without worrying about logic

Reviewer: I'm not sure formatting belongs in this list. Unlike linters and type checkers, formatters don't return a list of things to know about code. For the purposes of this article, I'd say we can safely omit this.

2. **Linters**: execute individually configurable checks known as "lint rules"

> 3. **Type checkers**: collect all files into a full understanding of the project

Reviewer: I don't think these descriptions are accurate. You're describing how ESLint works and how TypeScript works, but that doesn't necessarily mean all linters and type checkers work like this.

I'd focus instead on linting as the systematic evaluation of patterns in the structure of source code (maybe even briefly describe the original C `lint` tool) while type checking is an evaluation of data flow throughout the program.

Reviewer: It may also be worth nothing that compiled languages do type checking as part of the compilation step, but since JavaScript has no such steps, TypeScript is run separately to do this.

> We'll focus in this blog post on *linters*, namely ESLint, and *type checkers*, namely [TypeScript](https://typescriptlang.org).

Reviewer: I think we might want to expand this section a bit because both ESLint and TypeScript do more than one type of static analysis. For instance, ESLint also does scope analysis and code path analysis, while TypeScript does linting, scope analysis, and type checking.

Author: 🤔 what would the benefit of that be? Now that the following section reports examples of each, what's the new info we'd want readers to know going in?

ESLint and TypeScript are often used together to detect defects in code.

> ## Differences in Purpose

Reviewer: Again, just to be a bit more explicit:
```suggestion
## Digging deeper into linting vs. type checking
```

> Type checkers make sure the *intent* behind values in code matches the *usage* of those values.

Reviewer: Can we get more concrete here? Adding an example would help.

> They check that code is "type-safe": meaning values are used according to the ways their types describe as being allowed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They check that code is "type-safe": values are used according to how their types are described as being allowed.
```

> Type checkers do not attempt to look for defects that are only likely, rather than certain.

Reviewer: This sentence is difficult to parse. I'm not sure what it's supposed to be conveying.

Nor do type checkers enforce subjective opinions that might change between projects.
That means TypeScript does not attempt to enforce general best practices — only that values are used in type-safe ways.
TypeScript won't detect likely mistakes that work within those types.

> Linters, on the other hand, primarily target *likely* defects and can also be used to enforce subjective opinions.

Reviewer: Let's keep italics for the introduction of new concepts.
```suggestion
Linters, on the other hand, primarily target likely defects and can also be used to enforce subjective opinions.
```

> ESLint and other linters catch issues that are technically type-safe but are potential sources of bugs.

Reviewer: I don't think we can make any claims about type safety for lint issues.
```suggestion
ESLint and other linters catch issues that are may or may not be type-safe but are potential sources of bugs.
```

> Many developers rely on linters to make sure their code follow framework and language best practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many developers rely on linters to make sure their code follows framework and language best practices.
```

For example, developers sometimes leave out the `break` or `return` at the end of a `switch` statement's `case`.
Doing so is type-safe and permitted by JavaScript and TypeScript.
In practice, this is almost always a mistake that allows the next `case` statement to run accidentally.
ESLint's [`no-fallthrough`](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/no-fallthrough) can catch that likely mistake:

```ts
function logFruit(value: "apple" | "banana" | "cherry") {
    switch (value) {
        case "apple":
            console.log("🍏");
            break;

        case "banana":
            console.log("🍌");

        // eslint(no-fallthrough):

>         // Expected a 'break' statement before 'case'.

Author: I don't _love_ this first example:

* It's pretty verbose
* It doesn't show something that's _clearly_, _definitely_ a valuable report _("what if I want to break through, that's too opinionated!")_

...but I couldn't find a better lint rule that:

* Produces clear valuable report on a likely bug
* Is in `js.configs.recommended`
* Isn't superseded by TypeScript

Seeking inputs on a better example to show!

Reviewer: `no-unused-vars`? Although I guess TypeScript is now flagging that, too.

`no-unexpected-multiline`?

Author: Yeah, and `no-unexpected-multiline` is pretty much made unnecessary by formatters... _sigh_

        case "cherry":
            console.log("🍒");
            break;
    }
}

// Logs:
// 🍌
// 🍒
logFruit("banana");
```

Another way of looking at the differences between linters and type checkers is that type checkers enforce what you *can* do, whereas linters enforce what you *should* do.

### Granular Extensibility

> Another difference between linters and type checkers is how flexibly their areas of responsibility can be configured.

Reviewer: Again, I feel like you're confusing generic linters and type checkers with ESLint and TypeScript, specifically. There is nothing about the way ESLint or TypeScript works that is a requirement of linters and type checkers. In fact, before ESLint, linters didn't support plugins, and most languages with compile-time type checking aren't configurable at all.

Type checkers are generally configured with a set list of compiler options on a project level.
TypeScript's [`tsconfig.json` ("TSConfig") files](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/tsconfig-json.html) allow for compiler options that change type checking for all files in the project.
Those compiler options are set by TypeScript and generally change large swathes of type checking behavior.

Linters, on the other hand, run with a configurable set of lint rules.
Each lint rule can be granularly configured.
If you don't like a particular lint rule, you can always turn it off for a line, set of files, or your entire project.

> Linters can also can be augmented by **plugins** that add new lint rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Linters can also be augmented by **plugins** that add new lint rules.
```

```js title="eslint.config.js"
import js from "@eslint/js";
import jsxA11y from "eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y"

export default [
    js.configs.recommended,
    jsxA11y.flatConfigs.recommended,
    // ...
];
```

A project using the JSX accessibility rules would then be told if they render a native `<img>` tag without descriptive text per [`jsx-a11y/alt-text`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y/blob/main/docs/rules/alt-text.md):

```tsx
const MyComponent = () => <img src="source.webp" />;
//                        ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
// eslint(jsx-a11y/alt-text):
// img elements must have an alt prop, either with meaningful text, or an empty string for decorative images.
```

By adding in rules from plugins, linter configurations can be tailored to the specific best practices and common issues to the frameworks a project is built with.

### Areas of Overlap

Linters and type checkers operate differently and specialize in different areas of code defects.
Some code defects straddle the line between "best practices" and "type safety", and so can be caught by both linting and type checking.

> There are some core rules in that are superseded by TypeScript's type checking.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are some core rules that are superseded by TypeScript's type checking.
```

The compiler options are hardcoded to always ignore any variable whose name begins with `_`.

As an example, the following `registerCallback` function declares two parameters for its callbacks -`id` and `message`- but the developer using it only needed `message`.
TypeScript's `noUnusedParameters` compiler option would not flag the unused parameter `_`:

```ts
type Callback = (id: string, message: string) => void;

declare function registerCallback(callback: Callback): void;

// We only want to log message, not id
registerCallback((_, message) => console.log(message));
```

Unused variables in JavaScript can also be caught by ESLint's [`no-unused-vars`](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/no-unused-vars) rule; when in TypeScript code, the [`@typescript-eslint/no-unused-vars`](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-unused-vars) is preferred instead.
The lint rules by default also ignore variables whose name begins with `_`.
They additionally ignore parameters that come before any parameter that is itself used.

Some projects prefer to never allow unused parameters regardless of name or position.

> That stricter preferences helps prevent API designs that lead developers to creating many unused parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These stricter preferences help prevent API designs that lead developers to create many unused parameters.
```

type Callback = (id: string, message: string) => void;

declare function registerCallback(callback: Callback): void;

// We only want to log message, not id
registerCallback((_, message) => console.log(message));
//                ~
// eslint(@typescript-eslint/no-unused-vars):
// '_' is declared but never used.
```

That extra level of configurability provided by the `no-unused-vars` rules can allow them to act as more granularly configurable versions of their equivalent TypeScript compiler options.

> 💡 See [`no-unused-binary-expressions`: From code review nit to ecosystem improvements](/blog/2024/10/code-review-nit-to-ecosystem-improvements) for more areas of code checking with partial overlap between linting and type checking.

## Is a Linter Still Useful With a Type Checker?

**Yes.**

If you are using TypeScript, it is still very useful to use ESLint.
In fact, linters and type checkers are at their most powerful when used in conjunction with each other.

### Linters, With Type Information

Traditional lint rules run on a single file at a time and have no knowledge of other files in the project.

> They can't make decisions on files based on contents of other files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They can't make decisions on files based on the contents of other files.
```

    js.configs.recommended,
    jsxA11y.flatConfigs.recommended,
    // ...
];
```

A project using the JSX accessibility rules would then be told if their code violates common accessibility guidelines.
For example, rendering a native `<img>` tag without descriptive text would receive a report from [`jsx-a11y/alt-text`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y/blob/main/docs/rules/alt-text.md):

```tsx
const MyComponent = () => <img src="source.webp" />;
//                        ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
// eslint(jsx-a11y/alt-text):
// img elements must have an alt prop, either with meaningful text, or an empty string for decorative images.
```

By adding in rules from plugins, ESLint configurations can be tailored to the specific best practices and common issues to the frameworks a project is built with.

### Areas of Overlap

ESLint and TypeScript operate differently and specialize in different areas of code defects.
Some code defects straddle the line between "best practices" and "type safety", and so can be caught by both linting and type checking.
Those defects can often be caught by both ESLint and TypeScript.

To make the most of both tools, we recommend:

> * In your ESLint configuration file, use the [ESLint `js.configs.recommended` config](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/use/getting-started#configuration), at least the [`tseslint.configs.recommended` config from typescript-eslint](https://typescript-eslint.io/getting-started/typed-linting), and any community plugins relevant to your project's libraries and frameworks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In your ESLint configuration file, use:
  - the [ESLint `js.configs.recommended` config](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/use/getting-started#configuration)
  - the [`tseslint.configs.recommended` config from typescript-eslint](https://typescript-eslint.io/getting-started/typed-linting)
  - any community plugins relevant to your project's libraries and frameworks
```

* In your TypeScript configuration file, enable [`strict` mode](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#strict) to catch as many type safety issues as possible

> typescript-eslint's recommended preset configs disable core ESLint rules that are not helpful with TypeScript.
> The configs leave on any core ESLint rules that are useful alongside type checking.

Reviewer: "preset" isn't a term we use in ESLint
```suggestion
**Note:** typescript-eslint's `tseslint.configs.recommended` disable core ESLint rules that are not helpful with TypeScript.
The config leaves on any core ESLint rules that are useful alongside type checking.
```

#### Unused Locals and Parameters

The only TypeScript compiler options we recommend keeping off when using linting are those that enable checking for unused variables:

> * [`noUnusedLocals`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noUnusedLocals): which reports on unused declared local variables
> * [`noUnusedParameters`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noUnusedParameters): which reports on unused function parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [`noUnusedLocals`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noUnusedLocals) - reports on unused declared local variables
* [`noUnusedParameters`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig/#noUnusedParameters) - reports on unused function parameters
```

> Those compiler options are useful when not using a linter.
> However, they aren't configurable the way lint rules are, and so can't be configured to higher or lower strictness levels per a project's preferences.
> The compiler options are hardcoded to always ignore any variable whose name begins with `_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These compiler options are useful when not using ESLint.
However, they aren't configurable the way lint rules are, and so can't be configured to higher or lower strictness levels based on a project's preferences.
For example, the compiler options are hardcoded to always ignore any variable whose name begins with `_` while ESLint's `no-unused-vars` doesn't treat these variables any differently until configured to do so.
```

> As an example, the following `registerCallback` function declares two parameters for its callbacks -`id` and `message`- but the developer using it only needed `message`.
> TypeScript's `noUnusedParameters` compiler option would not flag the unused parameter `_`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, the following `registerCallback` function declares two parameters for its callbacks,`id` and `message`, but the developer using it only needed `message`.
TypeScript's `noUnusedParameters` compiler option would not flag the unused parameter `_`:
```

```ts
type Callback = (id: string, message: string) => void;

declare function registerCallback(callback: Callback): void;

// We only want to log message, not id
registerCallback((_, message) => console.log(message));
```

Unused variables in JavaScript can also be caught by ESLint's [`no-unused-vars`](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/no-unused-vars) rule; when in TypeScript code, the [`@typescript-eslint/no-unused-vars`](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-unused-vars) is preferable instead.

> The lint rules by default also ignore variables whose name begins with `_`.

Reviewer: Which lint rules are you referring to? `no-unused-vars` does not ignore variables that begin with `_` by default. You need to use `varsIgnorePattern` and associated options to enable that: https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/no-unused-vars#argsignorepattern

Some projects prefer to never allow unused parameters regardless of name or position.
These stricter preferences help prevent API designs that lead developers to create many unused parameters.

A more strict ESLint configuration would be able to report on the `_` parameter:

```ts
/* eslint @typescript-eslint/no-unused-vars: ["error", { "args": "all", "argsIgnorePattern": "" }] */

type Callback = (id: string, message: string) => void;

declare function registerCallback(callback: Callback): void;

// We only want to log message, not id
registerCallback((_, message) => console.log(message));
//                ~
// eslint(@typescript-eslint/no-unused-vars):
// '_' is declared but never used.
```

That extra level of configurability provided by the `no-unused-vars` rules can allow them to act as more granularly configurable versions of their equivalent TypeScript compiler options.

> 💡 See [`no-unused-binary-expressions`: From code review nit to ecosystem improvements](/blog/2024/10/code-review-nit-to-ecosystem-improvements) for more areas of code checking with partial overlap between linting and type checking.

> ## Is a ESLint Still Useful With TypeScript?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Is ESLint Useful With TypeScript?
```

**Yes.**

If you are using TypeScript, it is still very useful to use ESLint.
In fact, ESLint and TypeScript are at their most powerful when used in conjunction with each other.

> ### ESLint, With Type Information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### ESLint with Type Information
```

> Traditional lint rules run on a single file at a time and have no knowledge of other files in the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traditional ESLint rules run on a single file at a time and have no knowledge of other files in the project.
```

In doing so, type checked lint rules can make decisions based on other files.

For example, [`@typescript-eslint/no-for-in-array`](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-for-in-array) is able to detect `for...in` loops over values that are array types, even if the values come from other files.
TypeScript would not report a type error for a `for...in` loop over an array because doing so is technically type-safe and might be what a developer intended.
A linter, however, could be configured to notice that the developer probably made a mistake and meant to use a `for...of` loop instead:

```ts
// declare function getArrayOfNames(): string[];
import { getArrayOfNames } from "./my-names";

for (const name in getArrayOfNames()) {
    // eslint(@typescript-eslint/no-for-in-array):
    // For-in loops over arrays skips holes, returns indices as strings,
    // and may visit the prototype chain or other enumerable properties.
    // Use a more robust iteration method such as for-of or array.forEach instead.
    console.log(name);
}
```

Augmenting ESLint with information from TypeScript makes for a more powerful set of lint rules.

> See [Typed Linting: The Most Powerful TypeScript Linting Ever](https://typescript-eslint.io/blog/typed-linting) for more details on typed linting with typescript-eslint.

Reviewer: I think we need to make mention that type-aware linting has performance implications.

> ### TypeScript, With Linting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### TypeScript with Linting
```

TypeScript adds extra complexity to JavaScript.
That complexity is often worth it, but any added complexity brings with it the potential for misuse.

> Linters are useful for stopping developers from making TypeScript-specific blunders in code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ESLint is useful for stopping developers from making TypeScript-specific blunders in code.
```

[`@typescript-eslint/no-empty-object-type`](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-empty-object-type) catches uses of the `{}` type that likely meant `object` or `unknown` instead:

```ts
export function logObjectEntries(value: {}) {
    //                                  ~~
    // eslint(@typescript-eslint/no-empty-object-type):
    // The `{}` ("empty object") type allows any non-nullish value, including literals like `0` and `""`.
    // - If that's what you want, disable this lint rule with an inline comment or configure the 'allowObjectTypes' rule option.
    // - If you want a type meaning "any object", you probably want `object` instead.
    // - If you want a type meaning "any value", you probably want `unknown` instead.
    console.log(Object.entries(value));
}

logObjectEntries(0); // No type error!
```

Enforcing language-specific best practices with ESLint helps developers learn about and correctly use TypeScript.

## Conclusion

Linters such as ESLint and type checkers such as TypeScript are both valuable assets for developers.
The two catch different areas of code defects and come with different philosophies around configurability and extensibility.

> * TypeScripts checks that code is "type-safe": enforcing what you *can* write
> * ESLint checks that code adheres to best practices and is consistent: enforcing what you *should* write

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* TypeScripts checks that code is "type-safe", enforcing what you *can* write.
* ESLint checks that code adheres to best practices and is consistent, enforcing what you *should* write.
```

We'll focus in this blog post on ESLint and TypeScript:

* **ESLint**: executes individually configurable checks known as "lint rules"
* **TypeScript**: collects all files into a full understanding of the project

ESLint and TypeScript use some of the same forms of analysis to detect defects in code.
They both analyze how scopes and variables are created and used in code, and can catch issues such as referencing a variable that doesn't exist.
We'll explore the different ways the two use information from analyzing your code.

## Digging deeper into linting vs. type checking

Type checkers make sure the *intent* behind values in code matches the *usage* of those values.
They check that code is "type-safe": values are used according to how their types are described as being allowed.

For example, TypeScript would report a type error on the following `logUppercase(9001)` call, because `logUppercase` is declared as receiving a `string` rather than a `number`:

```ts
function logUppercase(text: string) {
    console.log(text.toUpperCase());
}

logUppercase(9001);
//           ~~~~
// Argument of type 'number' is not assignable to parameter of type 'string'.

> ```

Author: [Question] Is there a preferred strategy for showing TypeScript reports in code blocks within blog posts? _(similar to the question about ESLint rule reports later on)_

They may seem similar at first.
However, the two kinds of tools detect very different issues and are useful in different ways.

## What is static analysis?

*Static analysis* is the inspection of source code without executing it. This differs from *dynamic analysis*, in which source code is inspected while it is executed. As such, dynamic analysis brings with it the inherent danger of executing malicious code or creating side effects while static analysis is safe to execute regardless of the source code.

> There are three forms of static analysis commonly used in web development projects today:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three common types of static analysis tools used in web development projects:
```

We'll focus in this blog post on *linters*, namely ESLint, and *type checkers*, namely [TypeScript](https://typescriptlang.org).
ESLint and TypeScript are often used together to detect defects in code.

## Digging deeper into linting vs. type checking

Type checkers make sure the *intent* behind values in code matches the *usage* of those values.
They check that code is "type-safe": values are used according to how their types are described as being allowed.

Type checkers do not attempt to look for defects that are only likely, rather than certain.
Nor do type checkers enforce subjective opinions that might change between projects.

> That means TypeScript does not attempt to enforce general best practices — only that values are used in type-safe ways.

Reviewer: This is where I think it might be helpful to mention the different types of static analysis TypeScript does. `tsc` actually has added in a bunch of linting rules (tracking unused variables, conditions that always evaluate to true, etc.), so it does try to enforce some best practices too.

Otherwise, you may want to be more specific, something like "The type checking in TypeScript..."

Author: 👍 I don't want to weigh down the blog post with too deep a dive into the nuances of TypeScript. "The type checking in TypeScript..." resonates well with me.

TypeScript won't detect likely mistakes that work within those types.

Linters, on the other hand, primarily target likely defects and can also be used to enforce subjective opinions.

> ESLint and other linters catch issues that are may or may not be type-safe but are potential sources of bugs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ESLint and other linters catch issues that may or may not be type-safe but are potential sources of bugs.
```

Each lint rule can be granularly configured.
If you don't like a particular lint rule, you can always turn it off for a line, set of files, or your entire project.

Linters can also be augmented by **plugins** that add new lint rules.

> Plugin-specific lint rules extend the breadth of code checks that linter configurations can pick and choose from.

Reviewer: Again, this is how ESLint works, not how all linters work. Some linters don't allow configuration at all. Most don't allow plugins.

Linters and type checkers operate differently and specialize in different areas of code defects.
Some code defects straddle the line between "best practices" and "type safety", and so can be caught by both linting and type checking.

> There are some core rules that are superseded by TypeScript's type checking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some ESLint core rules that are superseded by TypeScript's type checking.
```
